it's now four o'clock in the afternoon
caitlyn's been in labor on and off for
the last five hours
we've just finished a period where
there's a couple of hours of not really
much activity
she's just getting to the point now
where she's having some pretty regular
and strong
contractions caitlin is entering the
advanced stages of labor
[Music]
coffee so when she has a contraction
um it's starting to emerge
don't touch it this is the amniotic sac
which means there's a cub on the way
probably the sack just burst around it
and now we can see her face
[Music]
here we go
[Applause]
[Music]
the sensation of caitlyn's licking
should trigger the cubs lungs to start
working
jazz is she looking at yeah she is now
yeah
it's gasped three times but it's not
breathing properly
it will stimulate it to breathe yeah
i still feel like we should get in there
and give her a hand
please please she's looking at space
yeah
it needs to clear out whatever liquid is
in the air in the mouth
so that is just leave her be for the
moment
it's been two minutes and although the
cubs made some weak attempts
it still hasn't started breathing
properly yeah
big gas it's gasping it's not it's not
breezy
okay it's breathing well there's two
three breasts four
good girl he did say wow she did very
well
there we go
[Music]
[Applause]
so the cub just made its first ever
noise a little squeal out to my mum or
my
mum looked surprised if anything
this is a beautiful 10 minute old cub
that's incredible isn't it man my heart
was in my mouth
there's a good girl for a first time mum
she's doing an amazing job and it's
really hard just to sit back here and
let her get on with it
now she's starting to have contractions
in preparation for the second one to
arrive
there's a sack coming out you can see on
this one
well done good girl number two doing so
well
good girl well done good
girl
oh this one's coming and kicking and
screaming
good girl it's absolutely amazing
absolutely amazing
it's two males and caitlin's allowing
giles to share in the moment
one's up and about better he's so good
he's so amazing
the next morning and the cubs are doing
well
there we go
they're a healthy 1.2 kilograms each
[Music]
and as the days roll by the cubs
continue to thrive
under giles's watchful eye so we try and
spend a little bit of time with them
every day
it's really important because ultimately
from day one we've been building our
bond with them
and the fact that they just get used to
you know hearing my voice and the
sensation of being touched and picked up
and stuff is really good
his eyes are still completely closed so
this is day eight but yeah it's usually
between
six and twelve yeah they're gonna stay
stay still for
just a second wow gee they're growing
they're growing
that's 200 grams again in a day it's
fantastic
so they're only 12 days old and they're
all already double their birth weight
the stronger and bigger you get the
quicker you get the better your chance
of survival in the wine
just notice that one little liar is open
which is awesome you can see me now sort
of you can see a shadow anyway
for the first couple of weeks they're
not going to be able to focus properly
it's still going to take like a human
baby like it takes a few weeks to
for the eyes to adjust
two weeks later the cubs are growing
stronger and it's time for giles to give
them names
so if you look at the two of them
together this little chap has more of a
continuous
stripe going along this way whereas this
one's a bit more broken
looks like a spot so this is we're
calling this one spot for the time being
and this one strike
and he tends to have a little bit more
of a feisty character than his brother
he is going to be a challenge i can see
it already
see what i mean about being strobby
aren't you yeah
that's good you've got spirit
so this is one we're calling spot this
noodle chap was the first one born
and he was the one that for the first
couple of hours we were a little worried
about he had a bit of a tougher time
didn't you
you're doing well he's nearly the same
weight as his brother now
despite their good health life for young
tigers is precarious
globally over a third of captive-born
sumatran cubs won't make it to adulthood
so you need to relax like your brother
relax hey so giles has made a difficult
decision to safeguard the cubs future
you're going to pass with flying colors
buddy yeah he's going to hand raise them
himself at home
so he can give them 24-hour care
and mel the vet has come to check if
they're healthy enough to leave
the hat sounds really good steady beat
no murmurs
how relaxed he's strong he's so relaxed
we're starting off with such robust
healthy little calves
they're not um too young so we've
already got
so much strength in them
the cubs will be vulnerable to illness
until they're around six weeks old
so giles has got to keep a close eye on
them round the clock
there is an awful lot of pressure you
know this first and foremost you know
there's pressure because
these guys are so important to not only
us here at the zoo but also to the
breeding program
potentially a lot of eyes around the
world that are you know watching what
we're doing and making sure we do a good
job
we'll give it a good go hey are you
doing a good guy you're so fluffy
hand raising the cubs will also help
prepare them for their future lives at
the zoo
as the cubs have become bolder at home
charles thinks it's time for spot and
stripe
to increase their socialization with the
adult tigers
back at the zoo
at the main tiger compound giles and his
team are full-time carers for 10
adult tigers and spot and stripe
have been gradually exposed to them
ah good boy good boy
good boy
seeing the adult tigers through the
glass is one thing
but their next big milestone is to
socialize and meet one of the adults
in the open air
there's going to be lots and lots of
interesting smells in here with all the
other tigers you know like the big guys
come through here on a regular basis and
it's much much more of a sensory
stimulation for them in here in terms of
the smell than just being around the
front of the glass like the tiger the
big tigers never go around that side so
get used to walking around here boys in
just over a month
the cubs will be too big to live at home
and they need to be accepted by the
adults for them to live here full time
he's a little bit nervous as you would
expect you can see
he's smelling all the smells around
there's lots of smells of big
predators other tigers around so you're
going to be a little bit cautious
naturally
in the wild an unrelated tiger could
easily injure the cubs
how is she she's waiting
and giles hopes maneki won't display any
threatening behaviors
so this is maneki
well this is the very very first time
that maneki's seen
any cubs whatsoever tigers communicate
using a range of vocalizations
and the most common non-threatening
sound they make
is called a chaff
trapping is reassuring so they're
chuffing at her they're chuffing at each
other
so it's a reassuring type of noise but
it's also a way of greeting saying
that she speaks your language not like
ruby
[Music]
tigers are one of the few cats in the
world to communicate in this way
these guys are very inquisitive so their
facial expression with their ears is
exactly that now he's being a bit
submissive for the fact that he's
putting his ears slightly back he's
getting down low
so that's just being a little bit unsure
if you like
whereas maneki you can see how relaxed
she is she's sat there she's
fairly happy so stripe is um
it's getting a little bit close he's
being cautious in the way
in which he approaches good boy
[Music]
you're brave yeah
look at his face he's very very cautious
like he wants to go up a bit closer but
he's also
a little nervous but that's to be
expected like look at the size of her in
comparison to him
so and she's reacting a little she
doesn't want to be surprised
the cubs have won over maneki and giles
is relieved
for a very first encounter you couldn't
have asked for it to go
any better or any smoother you know no
one's been
aggressive no one's showing over
interest or too much interest
say and the cubs have coping really well
our story begins with a tantalizing
glimpse of something very special
a cub just 10 days old
wild cubs as young as this have never
been filmed before
for their first six weeks most cubs
usually hide away in their dens
hardly glimpsing daylight these
are unusually adventurous
they seem totally unaware of the dangers
although their eyes are just opening
they won't see clearly for another six
weeks
they're the mother's first litter and
they're going to be quite a test for her
the tigers must pick them up by the
scruff of the neck
it's a delicate operation a little too
much pressure
and she'll hurt her cub
she can bite with a force of nearly 500
kilos
but this requires the gentlest touch
tigers usually have two or three cubs
four
are quite a handful and these already
seem more challenging than most
the ratio between the sexes among
newborns is usually equal
true to form two of these cubs are male
and two are female
it would be rare indeed for all four of
them to reach maturity
many dangers lie ahead
at this size they make a snack for even
the smallest predator
their mother must make sure that
everyone is accounted for
with two back in the den and one on its
way there's only one
straggler left to worry about
the cubs contact cry make sure he's not
forgotten
as long as the cubs call their mother is
compelled to keep retrieving them
but this would try any mother's patience
young cubs life is very precarious
had the mother been away hunting at a
moment like this the outcome
could have been very different
she's clearly going to be a devoted
mother
but she still has a lot to learn this is
not the way to do it
filming such behavior is unprecedented
it gives us an extraordinary opportunity
to follow these cubs as they grow
now that we're integrating them into the
compound one of the most important
aspects is obviously being on display
here where the public can see them
and part of that is just getting them
introduced and
and used to the big pool that we have
we're going to see if we
can take them for one of their very
first proper swims
it's going to be a brand new experience
for spot in stripe
and it could be overwhelming
you never quite know as to how they're
going to go for their first time
straight away jars can see a difference
in how the cubs react
to being near the water
spot is actually much more confident in
the water than his brother stripe
and stripe isn't so confident sometimes
i just think it's a personality thing
tigers are the one exception in the big
cat family along with jaguars that
you know really do enjoy the water
tigers are incredibly powerful swimmers
they have these
huge pores that actually when they
spread their toes about this
webbing if you like in between their
toes so effectively what you've got is
you've got this big
powerhouse of a unit and on the end of
their legs they've got these paddles
in some of the habitat you'll find them
like can island hop from
from place to place or swim across big
rivers and
and so water's not a problem
stripes still too nervous to take the
plunge
he needs some gentle encouragement from
giles
[Music]
that was incredible wasn't it just how
confident were they
even jumping in the water like
they're just natural aren't they oh
these guys are going to be water babies
for sure
don't jump into the water if you're
being chased by a tiger or climb a tree
all you got to do is just run faster
than the slowest person in your group
in fact the cubs have already started to
develop a behavior
that you really wouldn't want to face in
the wild
or in the garden if you're the family
dog
[Music]
they're honing their stalking skills
he's going into the kill caesar
will bite you
he's got a bone as young cubs like this
they
instinctively stalk each other and they
stalk mum because it's all good
training for obviously ultimately when
they're gonna need it
they go out on their own in the wild and
start making their own kills
[Music]
you